In this session we're
going to begin our
analysis of the alt -
the case Alternative
Distribution at Sugar
Sweets, Incorporated.
Ah, now in Sugar Sweets,
Incorporated, the case
situation is one in which
Sugar Sweets has some ah,
unhappiness with the
current distribution
channels and is
considering a totally
alternative form
of distribution.
Well, let's look first
at the demand side of the
analysis for Sugar Sweets.
What is it that management
at Sugar Sweets is
thinking about and why
are, why do they think an
alternative distribution
channel is necessary?
Well, the first question
I asked you to consider is
to think about the
consumers and think about
their service output
demands and think about
their buyer behavior.
How do people buy this
snack, these snack products?
These products are small
uh, candy items, mints,
ah, and things of that sort.
Well, what is the lot size
purchase when one buys
this type of product?
Generally, when most of
us, most consumers, not
all - again there are
segments of consumers -
but in general, the lot
size purchase is quite
small, one or two rolls
of candy mints, one or two
packages of chewing
gum at a time.
How much locational
convenience is required
for these types of products?
How intensively
distributed do they need to be?
Well, given the nature of
the product, consumers are
not going to spend a lot
time searching for them,
so locational convenience
is extremely crit - critical.
What is the consumers' demand for variety and assortment?
Well, certainly different
people have different
preferences for flavor
of candy, flavor of mint
products, ah, some
like cherry, some like
pineapple, some like
the rolls that have an
assortment of flavors, but
the assortment demand is,
is still somewhat small.
How long is a consumer
willing to wait to receive
this product once
they've ordered it?
And that answer to that
is they're not willing to
wait in most instances.
So Sugar Sweets,
Incorporated apparently
thinks that ah, the
shopping or buyer behavior
of most consumers for this
product falls into the
upper left-hand corner
of that, of the Bucklin Matrix.
In other words, consumers
buy the most available
brand at the most
available outlet.
They don't really do a
lot of comparison; they
certainly don't visit
different outlets looking
for this product.
This is the - this product
category, at least in the
mind of management at
Sugar Sweets, falls into
the true convenience
product, convenience store
type of shopping behavior.
In fact, management at ah,
Sugar, at the company that
we are calling Sugar
Sweets, made the statement
to those of us at Michigan
State is that this type of
product is the ultimate in
terms of impulse purchase.
And by that what he meant
is consumers don't even
think about buying this
product until they're
exposed to it.
So once they're exposed to
it, it comes to mind that
hmm, maybe I would like to
have a, a roll of mints or
maybe I would like to
have a package of gum.
And so from their
standpoint, the more
outlets available, the better.
Now from the supply side,
how this product has, has
gotten made available to
the end users, ah, there's
- the case tells us that
there've been many changes
in the environment, many
changes taking place.
The current intermediaries
that used by Sugar Sweets
are full-service wholesalers.
In fact, they're a type
of wholesaler typically
referred to as a "candy
and tobacco jobber."
These wholesalers have
a sales force, these
wholesalers carry
inventory, they generally
have deep assortment, they
carry multiple ah, brands
representing multiple
manufacturers.
Their sales force calls
on retail outlets.
Ah, they take the orders
from the retail outlets.
Generally, the sales
forces of these
wholesalers actually are
the ones who look at the
retailers' inventory and
then go to the retailer
and tell the retailer
"based on your current
inventory, this is what you need to replenish your shelf."
The wholesalers provide
delivery to the store.
Typically, they even stock
the retailers' shelf.
They give the retailer
credit ah, credit terms,
they're really true
full-service wholesalers.
And they're reluctant to
service the new types of
accounts that are
desired by Sugar Sweets.
In fact, these current
wholesalers are very, very
ah, comfortable in their
current role and in what
they are currently doing
in serving the types of
accounts they are
currently serving.
You might say from the
standpoint of Sugar
Sweets, these wholesalers
are complacent.
They don't want to - they
don't have the desire to,
to service of the
types of accounts.
They're not willing to
put forth the effort of
serving the other
types of accounts.
And so Sugar Sweets is
considering a new concept
and this, this information
is taken directly from the
case so I just want to
highlight a few aspects of
the alternative dis - of
the alternative channel.
What Sugar Sweets is
considering doing is
providing to ah, retail
outlets ah, pre-prepared
display units of their
most popular items.
And these items will be
restocked by having the
retailer ah, place
telephone orders and then
with, directly with Sugar
Sweets, and then Sugar
Sweets will use rapid
small package delivery
service to ship the
restock displays to the
retail store.
They say minimal effort is
required on the retailers'
part because of the
popularity of Sugar Sweets
brands and another
advantage for the
retailers is that product
will be fresher by direct
- because of direct shipment.
And they emphasize the
incremental money made by the
retailer from selling
these high profit impulse
snack foods ah, will
involve no risk for the
retailer since Sugar
Sweets will remove
slow-moving product at no cost.
So it's an interesting
concept and one that Sugar
Sweets has ah, done a
lot of market research in
trying to develop
estimates of, of sales and
pro - expenses and profit.
But they do think, do
recognize that this
alternative channel ah,
changes substantially all
of the flows and
functional performance in,
in the distribution channel.
Currently ah, currently
retailers who sell these
types of products really
put very little effort
into the process.
The candy and tobacco jobbers essentially do everything.
They count the retailers'
inventory, they at least
suggest what the retailer
needs in terms of restock
or resupply, ah, and in
the alternative channel
those functions and those
jobs are going, are not
going to be done
by a wholesaler.
Just remember something
we've said several times;
you can eliminate
channel participate -
participants, but you
cannot eliminate what they do.
So in fact, although Sugar
Sweets talks about the
simplicity of the
alternative channel for
the retailer, there're
many things that the
retailer is going to have
to do that in the in the
existing distribution
channel they're done by
the candy and
tobacco jobbers.
So let's take a look
at the specific case
questions as we
undertake our analysis.
Ah, Sugar Sweets, based on
its market research, has
developed a lot of
data about retailers.
Ah, they've estimated
that the total number of
possible retailers that,
that might be interested
in participating in this
alternative distribution
channel at 820,000.
They estimate that they
can initially contact
about 20% of those,
or about 164,000.
They estimate then that
there's going to be a
pretrial period or ah,
trial period and they
estimate of the 164,000
retailers contacted,
about 30% of those will be
interested and will
participate in the trial.
After the six-month trial,
they estimate that 55% of
those who participated in
the trial will remain in
and want to continue
distributing and selling
Sugar Sweets' products.
In other words, ultimately
they're estimating a
little over 27,000
retailers will participate
ah, after the
six-month trial period.
Now the question, the
second case question,
deals with the average
sales by the average retailer.
And so we need to look
at that first of all on a
daily basis, and then
secondly we'll look at
that - we'll translate
that daily basis to an
annual basis of what will
be the average retailer's sales.
So they expect the average
number of paying consumers
ah, at each retail store
will ultimately be ten
customers will actually
pay and buy Sugar Sweets
product in the
average retail store.
Furthermore, they, they do
project a relatively low lot size.
In other words, the
average customer will buy
only slightly over one unit.
So it means ultimately
that the ten customers
would, per day, would buy
11.2 units on average.
So the projected sales
dollars per day for the
ten customers would be $14.
On an annual basis then,
considering 260 days per
year (they're not thinking
365 days a year), ah, the
annual number of customer,
retail customers would be -
customers, consumers rather,
the average number of
consumers would be 2600
and the projected sales
dollars per year
ultimately ah, for each
retailer would be on
average a little over $3600.
Now question number three
begins, or look at what
will be necessary in
order on the part of Sugar
Sweets in order to service
this expected demand at
the retail level.
And they talk about having
large packs and small packs.
The large packs will hold
180 individual units; the
small packs will
hold 92 of, of these.
So on average what we're
saying is that the average
retailer who wants the
large packs would need
16.18, or let's just - for
simplicity purposes the
average retailer who wants
the large packs would
place 16 orders each year.
The typical retailer or
average retailer who wants
the small packs - that,
that retailer would place
approximately or for
simplicity purposes, let's
say 32 orders per year.
Now in our next session
we're going to continue
with this quantitative
analysis and take a look
at the costs to Sugar
Sweets of fulfilling this
type of ordering pattern
on the part of the
retailers and we'll look
then at the profitability
and finally we will
conduct some other
analysis of what other
factors does Sugar Sweets
need to consider other
than just these, these
estimates of sales
and expenses and profitability.
So your assignment for
next time is to answer the
last two questions and
think about the other
factors that need to
be considered by Sugar Sweets.